doc/user: add "Recursive CTEs" docs (#19941)
MaterializeInc/materialize: doc/user/content/sql/recursive-ctes.md

---
title: Recursive CTEs
description: "Recursive CTEs are used to define recursive queries."
menu:
  main:
    parent: 'transform'
    name: Recursive CTEs
    weight: 23
---

> Recursive CTEs can be used to define computations on recursively defined structures (such as trees or graphs) implied by the data in your tables.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Recursive CTEs explain the recursively-defined structures like trees or graphs implied in your data. Recursive CTEs capture all bindings of the structure and return them in a loop.
```

Author: > Recursive CTEs explain the recursively-defined structures like trees or graphs implied in your data.

I would rather say:

> Recursive CTEs _operate on_ the recursively-defined structures like trees or graphs implied in your data.

or

> Recursive CTEs interpret the recursively-defined structures like trees or graphs implied in your data.

and leave the second sentence out.

## Syntax

### with_recursive_cte

{{< diagram "with-recursive-ctes.svg" >}}

### recursive_cte_binding

{{< diagram "recursive-cte-binding.svg" >}}

Field | Use
------|-----

> **RETURN AT RECURSION LIMIT $n** | An optional clause indicating that the fixpoint computation should stop after `$n` iterations and use the current values computed for each `recursive_cte_binding` in the `select_stmt`. This could be useful when debugging and validating the correctness of recursive queries, or when when you know exactly how many iterations you want to have, regardless of reaching a fixpoint. See the [Examples](#examples) section for an example.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**RETURN AT RECURSION LIMIT $n** | An optional clause indicating that the fixpoint computation should stop after `$n` iterations and use the current values computed for each `recursive_cte_binding` in the `select_stmt`. This could be useful when debugging and validating the correctness of recursive queries, or when you know exactly how many iterations you want to have, regardless of reaching a fixpoint. See the [Examples](#examples) section for an example.
```

> **ERROR AT RECURSION LIMIT $n** |  An optional clause indicating that the fixpoint computation should stop after `$n` iterations fail the query with an error. Adding this clause with a reasonably high limit is a good safeguard against accidentally running a non-terminating dataflow in your production clusters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**ERROR AT RECURSION LIMIT $n** |  An optional clause indicating that the fixpoint computation should stop after `$n` iterations and fail the query with an error. Adding this clause with a reasonably high limit is a good safeguard against accidentally running a non-terminating dataflow in your production clusters.
```

**recursive_cte_binding**  | A binding that gives the SQL fragment defined under `select_stmt` a `cte_ident` alias. This alias can be used in the same binding or in all other (preceding and subsequent) bindings in the enclosing recursive CTE block. Note that in contrast to [the `cte_binding` definition](../select#cte_binding), a `recursive_cte_binding` needs to explicitly state its type as a comma-separated list of (`col_ident` `col_type`) pairs.

## Details

Within a recursive CTEs block, any `cte_ident` alias can be referenced in all `recursive_cte_binding` definitions that live under the same block, as well as in the final `select_stmt` for that block.

Semantically, a recursive CTE block will initialize all of its bindings to the empty collection and sequentially update them in a loop until either:

> 1. a fixpoint is reached (i.e., is the collections stop changing across iterations), or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. a fixpoint is reached (i.e., if the collections stop changing across iterations), or
```

1. some early exit criteria is satisfied.

{{< note >}}
In the absence of recursive CTEs, every `SELECT` query is guaranteed to compute its result or fail with an error within a finite amount of time.
However, introducing recursive CTEs complicates the situation as follows:

> 1. The query might not converge (and hence it might never terminate).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. The query might not converge (and may never terminate).
```

>    Most likely, this will manifest in a query that never yields results and eats up a lot of your cluster resources. See [an example](#non-terminating-queries) below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Non-terminating queries never return a result and can impact compute resources. See [an example](#non-terminating-queries) below.
```

Author: > can impact compute resources.

The point is that while the non-terminating WMR query runs, it allocates some CPU and memory resources that are nevevr released, so the impact is quite clear (colloquially I would say that the query "eats up" these resources).

Author: > Style guides typically suggest to avoid anthropomorphisms

My go-to replacement would be "can consume compute resources", but this might suffer from the same issue.

Reviewer 2: I think "consuming" resources is a super common thing to say, so it should be fine.

```sql
-- A hierarchy of geographical locations with various levels of granularity.
CREATE TABLE areas(id int not null, parent int, name text);
-- A collection of users.
CREATE TABLE users(id char(1) not null, area_id int not null, name text);
-- A collection of transfers between these users.
CREATE TABLE transfers(src_id char(1), tgt_id char(1), amount numeric, ts timestamp);
```

### Example data

```sql
DELETE FROM areas;
DELETE FROM users;
DELETE FROM transfers;

INSERT INTO areas VALUES
  (1, 2    , 'Brooklyn'),
  (2, 3    , 'New York'),
  (3, 7    , 'United States of America'),
  (4, 5    , 'Kreuzberg'),
  (5, 6    , 'Berlin'),
  (6, 7    , 'Germany'),
  (7, null , 'Earth');
INSERT INTO users VALUES
  ('A', 1, 'Alice'),
  ('B', 4, 'Bob'),
  ('C', 2, 'Carol'),
  ('D', 5, 'Dan');
INSERT INTO transfers VALUES
  ('B', 'C', 20.0 , now() + '10 seconds'),
  ('A', 'D', 15.0 , now() + '20 seconds'),
  ('C', 'D', 25.0 , now() + '30 seconds'),
  ('A', 'B', 10.0 , now() + '40 seconds'),
  ('C', 'A', 35.0 , now() + '50 seconds');
```

### Transitive closure

The following view will compute `reachable` as the transitive closure of a graph where:
* each `user` is a graph vertex, and

> * a graph edge between users `x` and `y` exists and ONLY one transfer was sent recently from `a` to `b` (using the rather small `10 seconds` period here for the sake of illustration):

Reviewer 2: There is "`x` and `y`", but "`a` to `b`".

Also, the change from "if and only if at least" to "and ONLY" completely changed the meaning. You could change it to simply "if at least", which has the intended meaning but avoids confusing non-maths people with the "if and only if" phrase.

Author: Changed to 

> exists only if a recent transfer from `x` to `y` has been made

> * an graph edge between users `x` and `y` exists if and only if at least one transfer was sent recently from `a` to `b` (using the rather small `10 seconds` period here for the sake of illustration):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* a graph edge between users `x` and `y` exists and ONLY one transfer was sent recently from `a` to `b` (using the rather small `10 seconds` period here for the sake of illustration):
```

```sql
CREATE MATERIALIZED VIEW reachable AS
WITH MUTUALLY RECURSIVE
  reachable(src_id char(1), dst_id char(1)) AS (
    SELECT DISTINCT src_id, tgt_id FROM transfers WHERE mz_now() <= ts + interval '10s'
    UNION
    SELECT src_id, dst_id FROM reachable
    UNION
    SELECT c1.src_id, c2.dst_id FROM reachable c1 JOIN reachable c2 ON c1.dst_id = c2.src_id
  )
SELECT src_id, dst_id FROM reachable;
```

You can insert [the example data](#example-data) and observe how the materialized view contents change over time from the `psql` with the `\watch` command:

```sql
SELECT * FROM reachable;
\watch 1
```

{{< note >}}
Depending on your base data, the number of records in the `reachable` result might get close to the square of the number of `users`.
{{</ note >}}

### Aggregations over a hierarchy

> We might want to keep track of the aggregated net balance per area for a recent period of time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You might want to keep track of the aggregated net balance per area for a recent period of time.
```

      FROM
        users
        LEFT JOIN credits USING(id)
        LEFT JOIN debits USING(id)
    ),
    direct_balances(id int, parent int, balance numeric) AS (
      SELECT
        a.id as id,
        a.parent as parent,
        coalesce(sum(ub.balance), 0) as balance
      FROM
        areas a
        LEFT JOIN users u ON (a.id = u.area_id)
        LEFT JOIN user_balances ub ON (u.id = ub.id)
      GROUP BY
        a.id, a.parent
    ),
    indirect_balances(id int, parent int, balance numeric) AS (
      SELECT
        db.id as id,
        db.parent as parent,
        db.balance + coalesce(sum(ib.balance), 0) as balance
      FROM
        direct_balances db
        LEFT JOIN indirect_balances ib ON (db.id = ib.parent)
      GROUP BY
        db.id, db.parent, db.balance
    )
  SELECT
    id, balance
  FROM
    indirect_balances;
```

As before, you can insert [the example data](#example-data) and observe how the materialized view contents change over time from the `psql` with the `\watch` command:

```sql
SELECT id, name, balance FROM area_balances JOIN areas USING(id) ORDER BY id;
\watch 1
```

### Non-terminating queries

> Let us consider a slight variation of the [transitive closure example](#transitive-closure) from above with the following changes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's look at a slight variation of the [transitive closure example](#transitive-closure) from above with the following changes:
```

1. All `UNION` operators are replaced with `UNION ALL`.
2. The `mz_now() < ts + $period` predicate from the first `UNION` branch is omitted.
3. The `WITH MUTUALLY RECURSIVE` clause has an optional `ERROR AT RECURSION LIMIT 100`.
4. The final result is ordered by `src_id, dst_id` (for the sake of illustration).

```sql
WITH MUTUALLY RECURSIVE (ERROR AT RECURSION LIMIT 100)
  reachable(src_id char(1), dst_id char(1)) AS (
    SELECT DISTINCT src_id, tgt_id FROM transfers
    UNION ALL
    SELECT src_id, dst_id FROM reachable
    UNION ALL
    SELECT c1.src_id, c2.dst_id FROM reachable c1 JOIN reachable c2 ON c1.dst_id = c2.src_id
  )
SELECT src_id, dst_id FROM reachable ORDER BY src_id, dst_id;
```

After inserting [the example data](#example-data) you can observe that executing the above statement returns the following error:

```text
ERROR:  Evaluation error: Recursive query exceeded the recursion limit 100. (Use RETURN AT RECURSION LIMIT to not error, but return the current state as the final result when reaching the limit.)
```

The recursive CTE `reachable` has not converged to a fixpoint within the first 100 iterations!

> To see why, we can run variants of the same query where the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To see why, you can run variants of the same query where the
```

  - An alternative path from `x` to `y` already existed before the insertion, or
  - An alternative path from `x` to `y` will exist after the removal.
- Inserting or removing `transfers` will not change most of the contents of the `area_balances` collection. This is true because:
  - Areas are organized in a hierarchy with a maximum height `h`.
  - A single transfer contributes directly only to the `area_balances` of the areas where the `src_id` and `tgt_id` belong.
  - A single transfer contributes indirectly only to the `area_balances` of the areas ancestor areas of the above two areas.
  - Consequently, each `transfer` change will affect at most `2` areas in each iteration and at most `2*h` areas in total.

However, note that not all iterative algorithms have this property. For example:

- In a naive PageRank implementation, the introduction of a link between two pages `x` and `y` will change the PageRank of these two pages and every page `z` transitively connected to either `x` or `y`.
  Since most graphs exhibit [small-world properties](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Small-world_network), this might represent most of the existing pages.

> - In a [naive k-means clustering algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/K-means_clustering), inserting or removing a new data point will effect the positions of the `k` mean points after each iteration.

Reviewer 2: effect -> affect

https://www.merriam-webster.com/words-at-play/affect-vs-effect-usage-difference

Author: I'm now confused because @tr0njavolta requested the change in the opposite direction :)

Reviewer: My bad! Read a little too quickly 😨

> - In a [naive k-means clustering algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/K-means_clustering), inserting or removing a new data point will affect the positions of the `k` mean points after each iteration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- In a [naive k-means clustering algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/K-means_clustering), inserting or removing a new data point will effect the positions of the `k` mean points after each iteration.
```

**recursive_cte_binding**  | A binding that gives the SQL fragment defined under `select_stmt` a `cte_ident` alias. This alias can be used in the same binding or in all other (preceding and subsequent) bindings in the enclosing recursive CTE block. Note that in contrast to [the `cte_binding` definition](../select#cte_binding), a `recursive_cte_binding` needs to explicitly state its type as a comma-separated list of (`col_ident` `col_type`) pairs.

## Details

Within a recursive CTEs block, any `cte_ident` alias can be referenced in all `recursive_cte_binding` definitions that live under the same block, as well as in the final `select_stmt` for that block.

Semantically, a recursive CTE block will initialize all of its bindings to the empty collection and sequentially update them in a loop until either:

1. a fixpoint is reached (i.e., if the collections stop changing across iterations), or

> 1. some early exit criteria is satisfied.

Reviewer 2: There are two "1."s.

Author: This is markdown syntax for ordered lists, they will be rendered as `<ol>` tags and the HTML engine will set them as increasing numbers. I'll change that so people reading the `*.md` file are not confused.

---
title: Recursive CTEs

> description: "Recursive CTEs is used to define recursive queries."

Reviewer 2: are

menu:
  main:
    parent: 'transform'
    name: Recursive CTEs
    weight: 22
---

> Recursive CTEs can be used to define computations on recursively defined strucutes (such as trees or graphs) implied by the data in your tables.

Reviewer 2: structures

## Syntax

### with_recursive_cte

{{< diagram "with-recursive-ctes.svg" >}}

### recursive_cte_binding

{{< diagram "recursive-cte-binding.svg" >}}

Field | Use
------|-----

> **RETURN AT RECURSION LIMIT $n** | An optional clause indicating that the fixpoint computation should stop after `$n` iterations and offer the current values computed for each `recurive_cte_binding` to the `select_stmt`. This could be useful when debugging and validating the correctness of recursive queries. See the [Examples](#examples)

Reviewer 2: `.` missing at the end.

Also, maybe add to the end of the "useful when" sentence something like "or when you know exactly how many iterations you want to have, regardless of reaching a fixpoint".

> **ERROR AT RECURSION LIMIT $n** |  An optional clause indicating that the fixpoint computation should stop after `$n` iterations fail the query with an error. Adding this clause with a reasonably high limit is a good safeguard against accidentally running a dataflow in your production clusters.

Reviewer 2: - _and_ fail
- "running a dataflow" -> "running a _divergent_ dataflow" (or maybe say something like infinite loop, to avoid the maybe-scary word "divergent")

Author: Maybe "non-terminating" dataflow?

> **recursive_cte_binding**  | A binding that gives the SQL fragment defined under `select_stmt` an `cte_ident` alias. This alias can be used in the same binding or in all other (preceding and subsequent) bindings in the enclosing recursive CTE block. Note that in contrast to [the `cte_binding` definition](../select#cte_binding), a `recursive_cte_binding` needs to explicitly state its relation type as a comma-separated list of (`col_ident` `col_type`) pairs.

Reviewer 2: "an `cte_ident`" -> "a `cte_ident`"

## Details

Within a recursive CTEs block, any `cte_ident` alias can be referenced in all `recursive_cte_binding` definitions that live under the same block, as well as in the final `select_stmt` for that block.

Semantically, a recursive CTE block will initialize all of its bindings to the empty collection and sequentially update them in a loop until either:

1. a fixpoint is reached (i.e., is the collections stops changing across iterations), or
1. some early exit criteria is satisfied.

**Note:** In the absence of recursive CTEs and for a fixed `AS OF` time, every `SELECT` query is guaranteed to compute its result or fail with an error within a finite amount of time.
However, introcuding recursive CTEs compliates things in the following sense:

1. Even for a fixed `AS OF` time the query might not converge.

>    This most will manifest in a query that never yields results and eats up a lot of your cluster resources.

Reviewer 2: This most likely will
